=============
Compute Nodes
=============

In this chapter, we discuss some of the choices you need to consider
when building out your compute nodes. Compute nodes form the resource
core of the OpenStack Compute cloud, providing the processing, memory,
network and storage resources to run instances.

Choosing a CPU
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The type of CPU in your compute node is a very important choice. First,
ensure that the CPU supports virtualization by way of *VT-x* for Intel
chips and *AMD-v* for AMD chips.

.. note::

   Consult the vendor documentation to check for virtualization
   support. For Intel, read `“Does my processor support Intel® Virtualization
   Technology?” <http://www.intel.com/support/processors/sb/cs-030729.htm>`_.
   For AMD, read `AMD Virtualization
   <http://www.amd.com/en-us/innovations/software-technologies/server-solution/virtualization>`_.
   Note that your CPU may support virtualization but it may be
   disabled. Consult your BIOS documentation for how to enable CPU
   features.

The number of cores that the CPU has also affects the decision. It's
common for current CPUs to have up to 12 cores. Additionally, if an
Intel CPU supports hyperthreading, those 12 cores are doubled to 24
cores. If you purchase a server that supports multiple CPUs, the number
of cores is further multiplied.

**Multithread Considerations**

Hyper-Threading is Intel's proprietary simultaneous multithreading
implementation used to improve parallelization on their CPUs. You might
consider enabling Hyper-Threading to improve the performance of
multithreaded applications.

Whether you should enable Hyper-Threading on your CPUs depends upon your
use case. For example, disabling Hyper-Threading can be beneficial in
intense computing environments. We recommend that you do performance
testing with your local workload with both Hyper-Threading on and off to
determine what is more appropriate in your case.

Choosing a Hypervisor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A hypervisor provides software to manage virtual machine access to the
underlying hardware. The hypervisor creates, manages, and monitors
virtual machines. OpenStack Compute supports many hypervisors to various
degrees, including:

-  `KVM <http://www.linux-kvm.org/page/Main_Page>`_

-  `LXC <https://linuxcontainers.org/>`_

-  `QEMU <http://wiki.qemu.org/Main_Page>`_

-  `VMware
   ESX/ESXi <https://www.vmware.com/support/vsphere-hypervisor>`_

-  `Xen <http://www.xenproject.org/>`_

-  `Hyper-V <http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh831531.aspx>`_

-  `Docker <https://www.docker.com/>`_

Probably the most important factor in your choice of hypervisor is your
current usage or experience. Aside from that, there are practical
concerns to do with feature parity, documentation, and the level of
community experience.

For example, KVM is the most widely adopted hypervisor in the OpenStack
community. Besides KVM, more deployments run Xen, LXC, VMware, and
Hyper-V than the others listed. However, each of these are lacking some
feature support or the documentation on how to use them with OpenStack
is out of date.

The best information available to support your choice is found on the
`Hypervisor Support Matrix
<http://docs.openstack.org/developer/nova/support-matrix.html>`_
and in the `configuration reference
<http://docs.openstack.org/liberty/config-reference/content/section_compute-hypervisors.html>`_.

.. note::

   It is also possible to run multiple hypervisors in a single
   deployment using host aggregates or cells. However, an individual
   compute node can run only a single hypervisor at a time.

Instance Storage Solutions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As part of the procurement for a compute cluster, you must specify some
storage for the disk on which the instantiated instance runs. There are
three main approaches to providing this temporary-style storage, and it
is important to understand the implications of the choice.

They are:

-  Off compute node storage—shared file system

-  On compute node storage—shared file system

-  On compute node storage—nonshared file system

In general, the questions you should ask when selecting storage are as
follows:

-  What is the platter count you can achieve?

-  Do more spindles result in better I/O despite network access?

-  Which one results in the best cost-performance scenario you're aiming
   for?

-  How do you manage the storage operationally?

Many operators use separate compute and storage hosts. Compute services
and storage services have different requirements, and compute hosts
typically require more CPU and RAM than storage hosts. Therefore, for a
fixed budget, it makes sense to have different configurations for your
compute nodes and your storage nodes. Compute nodes will be invested in
CPU and RAM, and storage nodes will be invested in block storage.

However, if you are more restricted in the number of physical hosts you
have available for creating your cloud and you want to be able to
dedicate as many of your hosts as possible to running instances, it
makes sense to run compute and storage on the same machines.

We'll discuss the three main approaches to instance storage in the next
few sections.

Off Compute Node Storage—Shared File System
-------------------------------------------

In this option, the disks storing the running instances are hosted in
servers outside of the compute nodes.

If you use separate compute and storage hosts, you can treat your
compute hosts as "stateless." As long as you don't have any instances
currently running on a compute host, you can take it offline or wipe it
completely without having any effect on the rest of your cloud. This
simplifies maintenance for the compute hosts.

There are several advantages to this approach:

-  If a compute node fails, instances are usually easily recoverable.

-  Running a dedicated storage system can be operationally simpler.

-  You can scale to any number of spindles.

-  It may be possible to share the external storage for other purposes.

The main downsides to this approach are:

-  Depending on design, heavy I/O usage from some instances can affect
   unrelated instances.

-  Use of the network can decrease performance.

On Compute Node Storage—Shared File System
------------------------------------------

In this option, each compute node is specified with a significant amount
of disk space, but a distributed file system ties the disks from each
compute node into a single mount.

The main advantage of this option is that it scales to external storage
when you require additional storage.

However, this option has several downsides:

-  Running a distributed file system can make you lose your data
   locality compared with nonshared storage.

-  Recovery of instances is complicated by depending on multiple hosts.

-  The chassis size of the compute node can limit the number of spindles
   able to be used in a compute node.

-  Use of the network can decrease performance.

On Compute Node Storage—Nonshared File System
---------------------------------------------

In this option, each compute node is specified with enough disks to
store the instances it hosts.

There are two main reasons why this is a good idea:

-  Heavy I/O usage on one compute node does not affect instances on
   other compute nodes.

-  Direct I/O access can increase performance.

This has several downsides:

-  If a compute node fails, the instances running on that node are lost.

-  The chassis size of the compute node can limit the number of spindles
   able to be used in a compute node.

-  Migrations of instances from one node to another are more complicated
   and rely on features that may not continue to be developed.

-  If additional storage is required, this option does not scale.

Running a shared file system on a storage system apart from the computes
nodes is ideal for clouds where reliability and scalability are the most
important factors. Running a shared file system on the compute nodes
themselves may be best in a scenario where you have to deploy to
preexisting servers for which you have little to no control over their
specifications. Running a nonshared file system on the compute nodes
themselves is a good option for clouds with high I/O requirements and
low concern for reliability.

Issues with Live Migration
--------------------------

We consider live migration an integral part of the operations of the
cloud. This feature provides the ability to seamlessly move instances
from one physical host to another, a necessity for performing upgrades
that require reboots of the compute hosts, but only works well with
shared storage.

Live migration can also be done with nonshared storage, using a feature
known as *KVM live block migration*. While an earlier implementation of
block-based migration in KVM and QEMU was considered unreliable, there
is a newer, more reliable implementation of block-based live migration
as of QEMU 1.4 and libvirt 1.0.2 that is also compatible with OpenStack.
However, none of the authors of this guide have first-hand experience
using live block migration.

Choice of File System
---------------------

If you want to support shared-storage live migration, you need to
configure a distributed file system.

Possible options include:

-  NFS (default for Linux)

-  GlusterFS

-  MooseFS

-  Lustre

We've seen deployments with all, and recommend that you choose the one
you are most familiar with operating. If you are not familiar with any
of these, choose NFS, as it is the easiest to set up and there is
extensive community knowledge about it.

Overcommitting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OpenStack allows you to overcommit CPU and RAM on compute nodes. This
allows you to increase the number of instances you can have running on
your cloud, at the cost of reducing the performance of the instances.
OpenStack Compute uses the following ratios by default:

-  CPU allocation ratio: 16:1

-  RAM allocation ratio: 1.5:1

The default CPU allocation ratio of 16:1 means that the scheduler
allocates up to 16 virtual cores per physical core. For example, if a
physical node has 12 cores, the scheduler sees 192 available virtual
cores. With typical flavor definitions of 4 virtual cores per instance,
this ratio would provide 48 instances on a physical node.

The formula for the number of virtual instances on a compute node is
*(OR*PC)/VC*, where:

*OR*
    CPU overcommit ratio (virtual cores per physical core)

*PC*
    Number of physical cores

*VC*
    Number of virtual cores per instance

Similarly, the default RAM allocation ratio of 1.5:1 means that the
scheduler allocates instances to a physical node as long as the total
amount of RAM associated with the instances is less than 1.5 times the
amount of RAM available on the physical node.

For example, if a physical node has 48 GB of RAM, the scheduler
allocates instances to that node until the sum of the RAM associated
with the instances reaches 72 GB (such as nine instances, in the case
where each instance has 8 GB of RAM).

.. note::
   Regardless of the overcommit ratio, an instance can not be placed
   on any physical node with fewer raw (pre-overcommit) resources than
   the instance flavor requires.

You must select the appropriate CPU and RAM allocation ratio for your
particular use case.

Logging
~~~~~~~

Logging is detailed more fully in :doc:`ops_logging_monitoring`. However,
it is an important design consideration to take into account before
commencing operations of your cloud.

OpenStack produces a great deal of useful logging information, however;
but for the information to be useful for operations purposes, you should
consider having a central logging server to send logs to, and a log
parsing/analysis system (such as logstash).

Networking
~~~~~~~~~~

Networking in OpenStack is a complex, multifaceted challenge. See
:doc:`arch_network_design`.

Conclusion
~~~~~~~~~~

Compute nodes are the workhorse of your cloud and the place where your
users' applications will run. They are likely to be affected by your
decisions on what to deploy and how you deploy it. Their requirements
should be reflected in the choices you make.
